This is 99% Invisible. I'm Roman Mars. This sound is unmistakable. Maybe you find it kind of lulling, like I do, since it signifies the end of the trip to the grocery store. You find all the things in your list and now you get to just stand there and zone out for a second,  or flip through a fashion magazine as a checkout person does the work. That's our new producer Katie Mingle. I myself find that sounds a bit anxiety inducing since it's also the sound of the total that I'm going to have to pay going up and up and up and up...

"When I go to the grocery store and check out, I'm utterly amazed at how well the scanners can read bar codes. No, I don't tell the checkout people; my wife always did: 'My husband here is one that invented that barcode!' And they just kinda look at you to say, 'Yeah, I believe that.' Course today they would look at you as if to say, 'You mean there was a time they didn't have a barcode?'" It's hard to imagine now: a world without bar codes. A world without George Laurer. 

"Well, hello. I'm George J. Laurer. I'm the one that invented the UPC bar code and symbol in 1973."
Now, some of you might be saying to yourselves, "I though Joseph Woodland invented the bar code!" And if you say that to yourself, you are a nerd...and I love you for it. And just hold your nerd horses because we're getting to Woodland right now. It started away a lot of things start, with people trying to make more money. "The grocery business decided that they needed some way to reduce their overhead." One of the main places they felt they were losing money was the checkout line. "They came up for the idea of having some kind of a scannable code," which would move people more quickly through the line. One of the first people that started working on it was an engineer named Joseph Woodland. After working on the Manhattan Project, Woodland moved on to develop an innovative way to produce elevator music. He was jamming on this project probably set to make a whole bunch of money until - and this is according to Woodland's New York Times obituary - his father forbid him getting into the industry because it was "controlled by mob." So Woodland moved on from elevator music to bar codes. He was trying to come up with a symbol that, when scanned, would translate to a series of numbers that a computer could use to identify a product. So one day he's sitting on the beach in Miami, Florida, so the legend goes, and Woodland's thinking about his days in the Boy Scouts and Morse code, as one tends to do on the beach. And he's kind of absent-mindedly drawing in the sand with his fingers, when suddenly he looks down, and he's got it. He's dragged his four fingers through the sand in the shape of concentric circles. Instead of "dot, dot, dot, dash, dash, dash," he thinks, "I can use skinny and wide lines." Bull's-eye. Bull's-eye: the very first bar codes were in the shape of a bull's-eye. Actually they didn't call them bar codes yet: Woodland's invention was called a classifying apparatus and method. I'm really glad that we don't call them that anymore. That was 1948, and then for about 20 years the bull's-eye idea gathered dust. The scanners and other equipment needed to put the system in place were just too expensive for any of it to be feasible. Fast-forward to 1973. The technology is now a bit more affordable and a group of supermarket executives led by a guy named Alan Haberman are like, "Okay, bar code or bust. We're doing this. By that time there were a few other designs out there, but none were perfect, so they put together a list of qualities that their ideal bar code would have and asked 14 different companies to come up with a proposal. "Could be no larger than one and a half square inches; had to have a good enough depth of field that could read about a foot and a half above the scanner; had to be omnidirectional..." That's George Laurer again. 

He was working at IBM at the time, which was one of the companies competing to make the best bar code, and most people thought that a circular design like Woodland's would probably work best because of the way the scanners worked. "In those days, just about every scanner was a single line. And you can just picture that if you have a single line and it was going in the direction of the bar it would not read all the bars." Woodland's original circular design solved this, because it could be read from any direction. That meant the checkout person didn't have to take your bag of Cheetos and turn it in just the right way before it could pass over the scanner.
But George didn't think the bull's-eye symbol would work. "I couldn't support that as the solution to what the grocery industry wanted because to me, there was no way that it would fulfill their specifications. My integrity just would not let me come up with a bunch of bull."
So George went back to the drawing table. "My wife said I came back and I would work on it day and night, and come back at night, and again, most of us was thinking arithmetic, trying to prove that this would work; also I have to admit I had to disprove that some of the others wouldn't work."

He ultimately came up with a rectangular bar code that fit more code into less space, which was crucial since grocery manufacturers were already grumbling about having to make room for this new symbol on their packaging. But there was still the issue of the one line scanner. 
"Somehow we got the idea that if we used an 'X' for the scan pattern, which could be developed very easily with a pair of mirrors," then, the bar code could be read by the scanner, no matter which way it passed. So even though Woodland came up with the original idea of using lines of various widths, George Laurer did more than just change that shape from a circle to a rectangle. 

He improved on the symbol, the code behind the symbol, and the scanners that read the symbol. Even Joe Woodland thought so. 
"Joe Woodland was very enthusiastic. He worked with me. In fact, he wrote the actual proposal for the submission to the grocery industry but it was my invention of the particular symbol and bar code that we see today." 

The symbol selection committee unanimously voted for George Laurer's rectangular symbol and code. They called it the Universal Product Code or UPC, and a year later in 1974, a pack of Wrigley's chewing gum became the first item to ever be scanned with the UPC bar code. 
"If bar codes hadn't been invented, the entire layout and architecture of commerce would've been different. The impacts are very difficult to overestimate. My name is Sanjay Sarma. I'm a professor of mechanical engineering at MIT." Sanjay Sarma has also worked with an organization called GS One. That stands for global standards one and if you need a bar code on your product, you have to go through GS one to get it. "Imagine if telephones and telephone numbers weren't standardized. You didn't have area codes and two people could have the same phone number...you need standards." 

When bar codes became the standard they didn't just make checkout lines faster. They allowed stores to keep track of huge amounts of inventory and to collect data on what we were buying: data they could use to keep us coming back for more. Without bar codes, "Superstores might not exist, but equally, you know, a small store might need more employees to run it. It's like the grease that that makes the machine run. It's one of the key elements of efficiency in our capitalistic system." And when you put it like that, you can see why for some people the bar code has come to represent everything they hate about capitalism and consumerism.

When I was a punk kid, if a band's album had a bar code , they were so with the market's fault that is become the symbol of the live of technology were afraid of her don't understand or being the card can wield in a larger monolithic machine the matrix if you will the live well to what industry wedding I am the founder of Azalea software here in Seattle 110 I've been writing software that prints barcodes for 25 years now the art bad they are good there just tools but most people look at them and don't even know where to start so let's demystify from minute and look at what's inside the box again what were talking about here is the UPC barcode that George Laura invented as the barcode that you and I and everyone in the world has had the most interaction with the UPC barcode is divided into two hats it's actually to barcode sitting right next to each other you can see this visually because there are these longer cars that come down in the middle and on each side is a competent guide bars and I burst how this can add that the code is starting and ending the left half of the barcode tells you who the manufacturer is in the right have tells you which particular product it is and is something I didn't realize the scanner is reading both the light and the dark lines to understand the scanner just consider yourself the dark room where the wall behind you has participated on it in your general flashlight and shined it over your head across the bars you would see the room got a little wider when your world the white bars that it would get dark when it was overlooked on black lines that don't reflect the laser light back to the scanner register as one white lines equal zero they're actually 95 evenly spaced columns on a UPC barcode of thick black line is actually a bunch of ones are next to each other the computer adds all that together and get a string of 12 numbers this number goes to the computer the computer know what's up in this table to get the information such as what is the product how much they're charging for but that is not in the barcode the only thing it's in the barcode is where the computer should look this number is also printed below the blackhead just in case the scanner isn't working which can mean really makes the whole ministry of little anti-kind take any TrackBack so when most people want to recently thought of barcodes they thought of something that was a combination of bars and stripes more recently two-dimensional barcodes which are they look like crossword puzzles have emerged the most popular being QR barcodes quick response that are scanned by cell phones we've all seen these and maybe if you must have actually bothered to pull out our cell phones and download the app required to scan the Aniston that I find China's Lane are annoying in excite no chilies I don't want more info on the blooming onion so if you did you might know that the blooming onions from outback so anyway I googled my IQ lack had slain and I got a bunch of articles basically saying that actually released on they just being misused Mosley by advertisers and to start slapping them on every single thing that Jerry lighting he still believes in them the nice thing about QR barcodes as they are not just the lookup number to an external database yes it can be a chunk of text it can be a URL it can be a whole lot of different things but there is no central authority that tells you what or how to do anything meaning you don't have to get to GS one to get a key lack of it which lets people D stuff like make a giant picture of Amy Goodman's face entirely out of DUI because this is my QR code Amy Goodman portrait made in 2304 unique QR codes that link to nine years of democracy now videos besides the QR code Lauren Woodland's original barcodes have spawned a bunch of other archives that are used for all sorts of things there's code 128 which is used for packaging and shipping is language it is by the post office to sort now their barcode phase radio frequencies defend outdated anaconda RFID tags and they are very barcodes in all pages get put in the same category because like barcodes are being used to keep track of inventory with a grocery cart full of RFID tag items one could conceivably wield their card through a big hoop that would read all the contents all it wants basically eliminating the checkout line entirely allowing more people to pass to stores even more quickly that we can all buy more stuff my current topics prescriptions library.luggage injured animals that are so many bipeds on so many things that according to Jay Whiting one future archaeologists come across remnants of our backward as civilization I stumble across a barcode big and assignment religious significance don't understand the supply chain we had no idea how far was going it we thought it would stay just within the grocery industry of course it didn't test today in the grocery industry actually went way beyond all the way to conspiracy there is in fact a silly conspiracy theory that all barcodes have the number of the beast 666 encoded yeah it has to do with those guidelines that comment the beginning middle and end of every biped and it's basically true that there are three sixes colluded in the guide buyers the answer to why is a bit technical you can read about it on George lawyers personal website in the FAQ section if you want that as exhibit B I submit George himself well hello George J Laura after we were identify energy and he was talking a little bit more about his job at IBM the limited come home at night go to work for white signature for two and then he started talking about his wife and kids she had the hard job she gave up her career which was a teaching career children to take care to believe when we are so proud of those really very are you just couldn't ask for better kids who this is because my wife spent her career response kids Anderson so is that soundly distinguish a very my daughter has bachelors degree 99% invisible was pretty since we started taking mingle with Sam Greenspan a breach of woman in the room and social thanks to Jenny Morgan forgot we are product of 91 points of local public radio K ALW in San Francisco introduced the offices of arc and architecture firm in beautiful downtown Oakland California in engineering from Charlotte part #PhD support for 99% invisible comes flawless listeners begin one flaw is that here hard and from square space the only one platform that makes it fast and easy to create your own website or portfolio ISU Sameer Square insights in this week it's 5440.com all spelled out with letters thing the way to Cottonwood 3-D topographic maps things United States to if you're up late
around AutoCAD in your place display the products of your inspiration square space.com and start a free trial if you decide to purchase use the opportunity visible save 10% a square , the opportunity is square space everything you need to create an exceptional insight stalwart support results provided by tiny letter email for people with something to say my friend Alexis magical always is up and say we say… Showing Michael Lewis in new book which is all about high frequency trading computer to be the security out to the help of his characters how signals travel around New York and it turns out that they have their own kind of byways and thoroughfares rejuvenating trading signal that originated in lower Manhattan with the left side highway out the Lincoln memo to the other side to cock in New Jersey there was this really particular exchange traders that geography of the fiber-optic lines and shaping the way that the entire stock market that's just one lives intriguing things Alexis ventricles tiny letter newsletter related.com it's free easy minimal and powerful the simplest ways is the great people behind we are a founding member of radio Tokyo from TRX in the life thereafter everything is radio everything is good find out how great podcasting can be utopia.net the utility from TRX is made possible with support from the Knight foundation in a long sponsor militants and celebrate creativity casting in teamwork if you are aged in supporting this in other podcast like it email sponsored PR stunt work human surveillance on Facebook we'll tweak you can find Hispanic tumbler it's fantastic that if you want to link to George for self published autobiography called engineering was fun!  The 90 9 PM radios
