This is 99% invisible arm Roman Mars. 
This sound is unmistakable. 
Maybe you find it kind of lulling like I do since it signifies the end of trip to the grocery store. 
You found all the things on your list and now you get to just stand there and  zone out for a second or flip through a gossip magazine while the checkout person does the work.
That's our new producer Katie Mingle. 
I myself find that sound a bit anxiety inducing since it's also the sound of the total that I'm going to have to pay going up and up and up. 
When I go to the grocery store and check out I am utterly amazed at how well the scanners can read barcodes.
No I don't tell the checkout people.
My wife always did, My husband here is one that invented that barcode 
And they kind of just look at you as if to say yeah I believe that. 
Of course today they would look at you as if to say, you mean there was a time they didn't have a barcode? 
It's hard to imagine a world without barcodes.  A world without George Laurer.  
Well hello. 
I'm George J Laura and I'm the one that invented the UPC barcode and symbol in 1973.
Now some of you might be saying to yourselves I thought Joseph Woodland invented the barcode,
And if you're saying that to yourself you are a nerd and I love you for it.
Just hold your nerd horses because were getting to Woodland right now.
It started the way a lot of things start, with people trying to make more money.
The grocery business decided that they needed some way to reduce their overhead.
One of the main places they felt they were losing was the checkout line.
They came up for the idea of having some kind of a scannable code which would move people more quickly through the line.
One of the first people that started working on it was an engineer named Joseph Woodland.  
After working on the Manhattan Project, Woodland moved on to develop an innovative way to produce elevator music.
He was jamming on this project probably set to make a whole bunch of money, until and this is according to Woodland's New York Times obituary his father forbid from getting into the industry because it was controlled by the mob. 
Woodland moved on from elevator music to barcodes.
He was trying to come up with a symbol that when scanned would translate into a series of numbers that a computer would use to identify a product. 
So one day he is sitting on the beach in Miami Florida
S the legend goes.
Woodlands i thinking about his days in the Boy Scouts and morse code.
As one tends to do on the beach.
He's kind of absentmindedly drawing In the sand with his fingers when suddenly he looks down and he's got it.
He's dragged his forefingers through the sand in the shape of concentric circles 
Instead of… – – – he thinks I can use skinny and wide lines.
Bulls-eye.
Bulls-eye.
The very first barcodes were in the shape of a bulls-eye. 
Actually they didn't call them barcodes yet. 
Woodland's invention was called a classifying apparatus and method. 
I'm really glad we don't call them that anymore. 
That was 1948.
Then for about 20 years the bulls-eye idea gathered dust.
The scanners and other equipment needed to put the system in place were just too expensive for any of it to be feasible.
Fast-forward to 1973.
The technology is now a bit more affordable and a group of supermarket executives led by a guy named Alan Haberman are like okay barcode or bust we're doing this.
By that time there were a few other designs out there but none were perfect. 
So they together a list of qualities their ideal barcode would have and asked 14 different companies to come up with a proposal.
Could be no larger than one of those one and a half square inches.
Had to have a good enough depth of field.
They could read about a foot and a half above the scanner.
Had to be omnidirectional.
That is George Laurer again.
He was working at IBM at the time which was one of the companies competing to make the best barcode.
And most people thought that a circular design like Woodlands would probably work best because of the way the scanners worked.
In those days just about every scanner was a single line. 
You can just picture that if you have a single line and it was going in the direction of the bar it would not read all the bars.
Woodland's original circular design solved this because it can be read from any direction.
That meant the checkout person didn't have to take your bag of Cheetos and turn it just the right way before it could pass over the scanner.
But George didn't think the bulls-eye symbol wood work.
I couldn't support that as the solution to what the grocery industry wanted because to me there was no way that it would fulfill their specifications.
My integrity just would not let me come up with a bunch of bull.
So George went back to the drawing table.
My wife said I came back and I would work on it day and night.
I would come back at night. 
Again most of us was thinking arithmetic.
Trying to prove that this would work.
Also I have to admit that I had to disapprove that some others wouldn't work.
He ultimately came up with a rectangular barcode that fit more code into less space which was crucial since grocery manufacturers were already grumbling about having to make room for this new symbol on their packaging.
Butthere was still the issue of the one line scanner.
Somehow we got the idea that if you use an X-for the scan pattern which could be developed very easily with a pair of mirrors.
Then the barcode can be read by the scanner no matter which way it was oriented as it passed.
So even though Woodland came up with the original idea of using lines of various widths, George Laurer did more than just change that shape from a circle to a rectangle.
He improved on the symbol, the code behind the symbol, and the scanners that read the symbol.
Even Joe Woodland thought so.
Joe Woodland was very enthusiastic. 
He worked with me.
In fact he wrote the actual proposal for the submission to the grocery industry but it was my invention of the particular symbol and barcode that we see today.
The symbol selection committee unanimously voted for George Laurer's symbol and code. 
They called it the Universal product code or UPC and a year later in 1974 a pack of Wrigley's chewing gum between the first item to ever be scanned with the UPC barcode.
If barcodes hadn't been invented the entire layout and architecture of commerce would have been different. 
The impacts are very difficult to overestimate.
My name is Sanji Sarma.
I'm a professor of mechanical engineering at MIT.
Sanji Sarma has also worked with an organization called GS1. 
That stands for Global Standards One.
And if you need a barcode on your product you have to go through GS1 to get it.
Imagine if telephone numbers weren't standardized,
Right and you didn't have area codes. 
Two people could have the same phone number, you know, you need standards.
When barcodes became the standard they didn't just make checkout lines faster.
They allowed stores to keep track of huge amounts of inventory and to collect data on what we were buying.
Data they could use to keep us coming back for more.
Without barcodes 
Super stores might not exist but equally you know a small store might need more employees to run it.
It's like degrees that that makes the machine run. 
It's one of the key elements of efficiency in our capitalistic system.
When you put it like that you can see why for some people the barcode has come to represent everything they hate about capitalism and consumerism
You can get wrapped candies of every kind, bubble gum, lollipops, fun sized candy bars, just a $1.89.
When I was a punk kid if a bands album had a barcode on it we knew they were complete sellouts.
It ain't the barcodes fault that but it has become the symbol or the glyph of technology we're afraid or don't understand or being a cog in a wield in a larger monolithic machine.
The matrix if you will.
Oh I will Jerry Whiting.
My name is Jerry Whiting. 
I am the founder of Azalea Software here in Seattle Washington. 
I've been writing software that prints barcodes for 25 years now.
They aren't bad they aren't good.
They're just tools but most people look at them and don't even know where to start.
So let's demystify from minute and look at what's inside the barcode.
Again what were talking about here is the UPC barcode that George Laurer invented.
This is the barcode that you and I and everyone in the world has had the most interaction with.
The UPC barcode is divided into two halves.
It's actually two barcodes sitting right next to each other.
You can see this visually because there are these longer cars that come down in the middle and on each side. 
Those are called the guard bars. 
The guard bars tell the scanner that the code is starting and ending.
The left half of the barcode tells you who the manufacturer is and the right have tells you which particular product it is. 
This was something I didn't realize.
The scanner is reading both the white and the dark lines.
To understand the scanner just consider yourself in dark room where the wall behind you has bars painted on it and you took a flashlight and shined it over your head across the bars.
You would see the room got a little lighter when you were over the white bars and it would get dark when it was over the dark bars.
Black lines that don't reflect the laser light back to the scanner register as one.
White lines equal zero.
They're actually 95 evenly spaced columns on a UPC barcode.
A thick black line is actually a bunch of ones right next to each other.
The computer adds all that together and you get a string of 12 numbers.
This number goes to the computer.
The computer now looks up in its table to get the information such as what is the product, how much they're charging for it. 
But that is not in the barcode.
The only thing that's in the barcode is where the computer should look.
This number is also printed below the blackhead just in case the scanner isn't working which for me really makes the whole mystery anticlimactic. 
I mean it's right there. 
So when most people until recently thought of barcodes they thought of something that was a combination of bars and stripes.
More recently two-dimensional barcodes, which are they look like crossword puzzles have emerged.
The most popular being QR barcodes quick response that are scanned by cell phones.
We've all seen these and maybe a few of us have actually bothered to pull out our cell phones and download the app required to scan them.
Yeah, there is something about them that I find kind of lame and annoying.
You know it's like, "No Chili's I don't want more info on the blooming onion."
Well if you did you might know that the blooming onions is from outback.
So anyway I googled why are QR codes lame. 
I got a bunch of articles basically saying they're actually really useful. 
They're just  being misused.
Mostly by advertisers who have just started slapping them on every single thing. 
But Jerry Whitng he still believes in them.
The nice thing about QR barcodes are they are not just a lookup number to an external database.
Yes it can be a chunk of text, it can be a URL, it can be a whole lot of different things but there is no central authority that tells you what or how to do anything.
Meaning you don't have to get to GS1 to get a QR code which lets people do stuff like make a giant picture of Amy Goodman's face entirely out of QR code.
This is my QR code Amy Goodman portrait made with 2304 unique QR codes that link to nine years of democracy now videos.
Besides the QR code Laurer and  Woodland's original barcodes have spawned a bunch of other barcodes that are used for all sorts of things.
There's code 128 which is mostly used for packaging and shipping.
There is postnet which is used by the post office to sort mail.
There are barcodes that use radio frequencies to send out data.
They are called RFID tags and they aren't really barcodes at all. 
They just get put in the same category because like barcodes are being used to keep track of inventory.
With a grocery cart full of RFID tag items one could conceivably wield their card through a big hoop that would read all the contents all at once basically eliminating the checkout line entirely and allowing more people to pass to stores even more quickly so that we can all buy more stuff.
Barcodes help us keep track of  prescriptions library.luggage injured animals that are so many bipeds on so many things that according to Jay Whiting one future archaeologists come across remnants of our backward as civilization I stumble across a barcode big and assignment religious significance don't understand the supply chain we had no idea how far was going it we thought it would stay just within the grocery industry of course it didn't test today in the grocery industry actually went way beyond all the way to conspiracy there is in fact a silly conspiracy theory that all barcodes have the number of the beast 666 encoded yeah it has to do with those guidelines that comment the beginning middle and end of every biped and it's basically true that there are three sixes colluded in the guide buyers the answer to why is a bit technical you can read about it on George lawyers personal website in the FAQ section if you want that as exhibit B I submit George himself well hello George J Laura after we were identify energy and he was talking a little bit more about his job at IBM the limited come home at night go to work for white signature for two and then he started talking about his wife and kids she had the hard job she gave up her career which was a teaching career children to take care to believe when we are so proud of those really very are you just couldn't ask for better kids who this is because my wife spent her career response kids Anderson so is that soundly distinguish a very my daughter has bachelors degree 99% invisible was pretty since we started taking mingle with Sam Greenspan a breach of woman in the room and social thanks to Jenny Morgan forgot we are product of 91 points of local public radio K ALW in San Francisco introduced the offices of arc and architecture firm in beautiful downtown Oakland California in engineering from Charlotte part #PhD support for 99% invisible comes flawless listeners begin one flaw is that here hard and from square space the only one platform that makes it fast and easy to create your own website or portfolio ISU Sameer Square insights in this week it's 5440.com all spelled out with letters thing the way to Cottonwood 3-D topographic maps things United States to if you're up late
around AutoCAD in your place display the products of your inspiration square space.com and start a free trial if you decide to purchase use the opportunity visible save 10% a square , the o pportunity is square space everything you need to create an exceptional insight stalwart support results provided by tiny letter email for people with something to say my friend Alexis magical always is up and say we say… Showing Michael Lewis in new book which is all about high frequency trading computer to be the security out to the help of his characters how signals travel around New York and it turns out that they have their own kind of byways and thoroughfares rejuvenating trading signal that originated in lower Manhattan with the left side highway out the Lincoln memo to the other side to cock in New Jersey there was this really particular exchange traders that geography of the fiber-optic lines and shaping the way that the entire stock market that's just one lives intriguing things Alexis ventricles tiny letter newsletter related.com it's free easy minimal and powerful the simplest ways is the great people behind we are a founding member of radio Tokyo from TRX in the life thereafter everything is radio everything is good find out how great podcasting can be utopia.net the utility from TRX is made possible with support from the Knight foundation in a long sponsor militants and celebrate creativity casting in teamwork if you are aged in supporting this in other podcast like it email sponsored PR stunt work human surveillance on Facebook we'll tweak you can find Hispanic tumbler it's fantastic that if you want to link to George for self published autobiography called engineering was fun!  The 90 9 PM radios
