This is 99% invisible. I'm Roman Mars.
This sound is unmistakably.
Maybe you find it kind of lulling like I do, since it signifies the end of a trip to the grocery store.
You found all the things on your list and now you get to just stand there and zone out for a second, or flip through a gossip magazine while the checkout person does the work.
That's our new producer Katie Mangle.
I myself find that sound a bit anxiety inducing since it's also the sound of the total that I'm going to have to pay, going up, and up, and up, and up.
"When I go to the grocery store and check out, I am utterly amazed at how well the scanners can read barcodes.
Now I don't tell the checkout people, my wife always did, 'yeah my husband here's one that invented that barcode.'
And they just kind of look at you as if to say 'yeah, I believe that.'
Of course today they would look at you as if to say, 'you mean there was a time they didn't have a barcode?'"
It's hard to imagine now, a world without barcodes, a world without George Laurer.
"Well hello, I'm George J. Laurer.
I'm the one that invented the UPC barcode and symbol in 1973."
Now, some of you might be saying to yourselves, I thought Joseph Woodland invented the barcode?
And If you're saying that to yourself, you are a nerd, and I love you for it.
And just hold your nerd horses because we're getting to Woodland, right now.
It started the way a lot of things started, with people trying to make more money.
The grocery business decided that they needed some way to reduce their overhead.
One of the main places they felt they were losing money was the checkout line.
"They came up for the idea of having some kind of a scannable code," which would move people more quickly through the line.
One of the first people that started working on it was an engineer named Joseph Woodland.
After working on the Manhattan project, Woodland moved on to develop an innovative way to produce elevator music.
He was jamming on this project, probably set to make a whole bunch of money, until, and is according to Woodland's New York Times obituary, his father forbid him from getting into the industry because it was controlled by the mob.
So Woodland moved on, from elevator music to barcodes.
He was trying to come up with a symbol, that when scanned would translate to a series of numbers that a computer could use to identify a product.
So one day he's sitting on the beach in Miami Florida, so the legend goes. 
And Woodlands thinking about his days in the Boy Scouts and Morse code, as one tends to do on the beach.
And he's kind of absentmindedly drawing in the sand with his fingers, when suddenly he looks down he's got it. 
He's dragged his four fingers through the sand in the shape of concentric circles.
Instead of dot, dot, dot, dash, dash, dash, he thinks, "I can use skinny and wide lines."
Bullseye.
Bullseye.
The very first barcodes were in the shape of a bullseye.
Actually they didn't call them barcodes yet, Woodland's invention was called a classifying apparatus and method.
I'm really glad that we don't call them that. 
That was 1948, and then for about 20 years the bullseye idea gathered dust.
The scanners and other equipment needed to put the system in place were just too expensive for any of it to be feasible.
Fast-forward to 1973.
The technology is now a bit more affordable and a group of supermarket executives led by a guy named Alan Haberman are like, "Okay, barcode or bust, we're doing this."
By that time there were a few other designs out there but none were perfect.
So they put together a list of qualities that their ideal barcode would have, and asked 14 different companies to come up with a proposal.
"Could be no larger than one-and-a, one-and-a-half square inches.
Had to have a good enough depth of field it could read about a foot and a half above the scanner.
Had to be omnidirectional."
That's George Laurer again.
He was working at IBM at the time, which was one of the companies competing to make the best barcode.
And most people thought that a circular design like Woodland's would probably work best because of the way the scanners worked.
"In those days, just about every scanner was a single line.
And you can just picture that if you have a single line, and it was going in the direction of the bar it would not read all the bars."
Woodland's original circular design solved this, because it could be read from any direction.
That meant the checkout person didn't have to take your bag of Cheetos and turn it in just the right way before it could pass over the scanner.
But George didn't think the bullseye symbol would work.
"I couldn't support that as the solution to what the grocery industry wanted.
Because to me, there was no way that it would fulfill their specifications.
My integrity just would not let me come up with a, with a bunch of bull."
So George went back to the drawing table.
"My wife said I came back and I would work on it day and night.
Come back at night, and again, most of this was thinking, arithmetic, trying to prove that this would work. 
Also, I have to admit, I had to disprove that some of the others wouldn't work."
He ultimately came up with a rectangular barcode that fit more code into space.
Which was crucial since grocery manufacturers were already grumbling about having to make room for this new symbol on their packaging.
But there was still the issue of the one line scanner.
"Somehow we got the idea that if we used an 'X' for the scan pattern, which could be developed very easily with a pair of mirrors," then the barcode could be read by the scanner no matter which way it was oriented as it passed. 
So even though Woodland came up with the original idea of using lines of various widths, George Laurer did more than just change that shape from a circle to a rectangle.
He improved on the symbol, the code behind the symbol and the scanners that read the symbol.
Even Joe Woodland thought so.
"Joe Woodland as very enthusiastic, he worked with me, in fact he wrote the actual proposal for the submission to the grocery industry.
But it was my invention of the particular symbol and barcode that we see today."
The symbol selection committee unanimously voted for George Laurer's rectangular symbol and code.
They called it the universal product code or UPC.
And a year later in 1974 a pack of Wrigley's chewing gum became the first item to ever be scanned the UPC barcode.
If barcodes hadn't been invented the entire layout and architecture of commerce would have been different. 
The impacts are very difficult to overestimate.
My name is Sanjay Sarma, I'm a professor of mechanical engineering at MIT.
Sanjay Sarma has also worked with an organization called GS1, that stands for Global Standards One.
And if he need a barcode on your product you have to go through GS1 to get it.
"Imagine if telephone numbers weren't standardized, right, and you didn't have area codes and two people could have the same phone number, you know, we need standards."
When barcodes became the standard, they didn't just make checkout lines faster.
They allowed stores to keep track of huge amounts of inventory and to collect data on what we were buying.
Data they could use to keep us coming back for more.
Without barcodes, "Super stores might not exist, but equally, you know, a small store might need more employees, to run it." 
It's like the grease that, that makes the machine run.
It's one of the key, you know, elements of, of efficiency in our capitalistic system."
And when you put it like that, you can see why, for some people, the barcode has come to represent everything they hate about capitalism and consumerism.
"You can get wrapped candies of every kind. Bubblegum, lollipops, fun-size candy bars, just a dollar eighty-nine."
When I was a punk kid if a band's album had a barcode on it, we knew they were complete sell-outs. 
"It ain't the barcode's fault, but it's become the symbol of the glyph of technology we're afraid of or don't understand.
Or being a cog in a wheel in a larger, monolithic machine.
The matrix if you will."
Oh I will, Jerry Whiting.
"My name is Jerry Whiting, I am the founder of Azalea software here in Seattle, Washington. 
I've been writing software that prints barcodes for 25 years now.
They aren't bad, they aren't good, they're just tools, but most people look at them and don't even know where to start."
So let's demystify for a minute and look at what's inside the barcode.
Again, what we're talking about here is the UPC barcode that George Laura invented.
This is the barcode that you and I, and everyone in the world has had the most interaction with.
The UPC barcode is divided into two halves.
It's, it's actually two barcode sitting right next to each other.
You can see this visually because there are these longer bars that come down in the middle and on each side.
Those are called the guard bars.
The guard bars tell the scanner that the code is starting and ending.
"The left half of the barcode tells you who the manufacturer is and the right half tells you which particular product it is."
And was something I didn't realize, the scanner is reading both the white and the dark lines.
"To understand the scanner, just consider yourself in a dark room where the wall behind you has bars painted on it.
And you took a flashlight and shined it over your head across the bars.
You would see the room got a little lighter when you were over the white bars, and it would get dark when it was over the dark bars."
Black lines that don't reflect the laser light back to the scanner register as one, white lines equal zero.
There are actually 95 evenly spaced columns on a UPC barcode.
A thick black line is actually a bunch of ones right next to each other.
The computer adds all that together and you get a string of 12 numbers.
"This number goes to the computer.
The computer now looks up in its table to get the information such as: what is the product, how much they're charging for it.
But that is not in the barcode.
The only thing that's in the barcode is where the computer should look."
This number is also printed below the barcode, just in case the scanner isn't working.
Which for me, really makes the whole mystery a little anticlimactic.
I mean, it's, it's right there. 
"So, when most people until recently thought of barcodes, they thought of something that was a combination of bars and stripes.
More recently, two-dimensional barcodes, which are, they look like crossword puzzles, have emerged.
The most popular being QR barcodes, quick response, that are scanned by cell phones."
We've all seen these and maybe a few of us have actually bothered to pull out our cell phones and download the app required to scan them.
Yeah there's something about them that I find kind of lame, or annoying.
You know, it's like, no Chili's I don't want more info on the Bloomin' Onion.
Well if you did, you might know that the Bloomin' Onion is from Outback.
So anyway, I Googled why are QR codes lame? 
And I got a bunch of articles basically saying they're actually really useful, they're just being misused.
Mostly by advertisers who just started slapping them on every single thing.
But Jerry Whiting, he still believes in them.
"The nice thing about QR barcodes is they are not just a lookup number to an external database.
Yes it can be a chunk of text.
It can be a URL.
It can be a whole lot of different things, but there is no central authority that tells you what or how to do anything."
Meaning you don't have to go through GS1 to get a QR code.
Which lets people do stuff like make a giant picture of Amy Goodman's face entirely out of QR codes.
"This is my QR code Amy Goodman portrait, made with 2,304 unique QR codes that link to nine years of democracy now videos."
Besides the QR code, Laurer and Woodland's original barcodes have spawned a bunch of other barcodes that are used for all sorts of things.
There's code 128 which is mostly used for packaging and shipping.
There's POSTNET which is used by the post office to sort mail.
There are barcodes that use radio frequencies to send out data, they're called RFID tags and they aren't really barcodes at all.
They just get put in the same category because, like barcodes, they're being used to keep track of inventory.
With a grocery cart full of RFID tag items one could conceivably wheel their cart through a big hoop that would read all the contents all at once. 
Basically eliminating the checkout line entirely, and allowing more people to pass through stores even more quickly, so that we can all buy more stuff.
Barcodes help us keep track of prescriptions, library books, luggage, endangered animals.
There are so many barcodes on so many things that, according to Jerry Whiting, "When future archaeologists come across remnants of our backward ass civilization, and they stumble across a barcode, they're gonna assign it religious significance if they don't understand the supply chain."
"We had no idea how far it was going to go.
We thought it would stay just within the grocery industry."
Of course it didn't just stay in the grocery industry.
It actually went way beyond that, all the way to conspiracy.
There is in fact a silly conspiracy theory that all barcodes have the number of the beast, 666, encoded into them.
Yeah, it has to do with those guard bars that come at beginning, middle and end of every barcode. 
And it's basically true that there are three sixes coded into the guard bars.
The answer to why is a bit technical, you can read about it on George Laurer's personal website in the FAQ section, if you want.
But as exhibit B I submit George himself.
"Well hello, I'm George J. Laurer."
After we were done with our interview, he was talking a little bit more about his job at IBM.
"And then when I'd come home at night I'd go, 'Oh I had a tough day,' while my poor wife was taking care of four kids. 
And then he started talking about his wife, and his kids.
"She had the hard job, believe me.
She gave up her career, which was a teaching career, in order to take care of the kids.
And believe me, we are so proud of those kids.
Really, they are, you just couldn't ask for better kids.
This is because my wife spent her career raising those kids.
I'm just so lucky."
So, I don't know, does that sound like a Satan worshiper to you guys? 
"My daughter has bachelors degree."
99% Invisible was produced this week by Katie Mingle, with Sam Greenspan, Avery  Trufelman and me, Roman Mars.
Special thanks to Jenny Morgan for production help.
We are project of 91.7 local public radio KALW in San Francisco and produced at the offices of Arcsine, an architecture firm in beautiful, downtown Oakland, California. 
"Bachelor's degree In engineering from Charlotte.
Our youngest son has a PhD from State."
Support for 99% invisible comes from our flawless listeners.
If you had one flaw maybe it's that you're a little too perfect, work a little too hard.
And fom Squarespace, the all-in-one platform that makes it fast and easy to create your own website or portfolio.
I asked you to send me your Squarespace created sights and this week it's fiftyfourforty.com, all spelled out with letters, they make laser-cut wood, 3-D topographic maps of these United States.
So if you're up late noodling around with AutoCAD and you need a place display the products of your inspiration, go to Squarespace.com and start a free trial.
And if you decide to purchase, use the offer code "invisible" and save 10%.
That's Squarespace.com and use the offer code "invisible".
Squarespace, everything you need to create an exceptional website.
Stalwart support is also provided by Tiny Letter, email for people with something to say.
My friend Alexis Madrigal always has something to say, what do you have to say Alexis?
"So in Michael Lewis' new book, which is all about high-frequency trading computers, he basically figures out, through the help of his characters, how signals would travel around in New York.
And it turns out that they have their own kind of byways and thoroughfares.
So he says that any trading signal that originated in lower Manhattan, went up the West Side Highway and out the Lincoln Tunnel, to the other side to Weehawken, New Jersey there was this really particular exchange traders that geography of the fiber-optic lines and shaping the way that the entire stock market that's just one lives intriguing things Alexis ventricles tiny letter newsletter related.com it's free easy minimal and powerful the simplest ways is the great people behind we are a founding member of radio Tokyo from TRX in the life thereafter everything is radio everything is good find out how great podcasting can be utopia.net the utility from TRX is made possible with support from the Knight foundation in a long sponsor militants and celebrate creativity casting in teamwork if you are aged in supporting this in other podcast like it email sponsored PR stunt work human surveillance on Facebook we'll tweak you can find Hispanic tumbler it's fantastic that if you want to link to George for self published autobiography called engineering was fun!  The 90 9 PM radios