This is 99% invisible.
I'm Roman Mars.
When designing a commercial structure, the architect must make the hallways wide enough for a wheelchair. 
The materials must be compatible with its surrounding climate.
The beams must be able to support the building and withstand the wind.
The building should be dynamic, interesting, comfortable, and ready to be completely abandoned if it burns.
There are a number of considerations for how a building should respond to emergency.
Horns, versus strokes, versus speakers.
The pulsating frequency of the light; the intensity of the light; smoke dampening. 
It goes on and on.
There's the sprinklers, the panic bars, you know the spring-loaded horizontal bar that you push to unlock emergency exit?
The smoke detectors--what kinds you use and the distances between them.
You know, a lot of people hardly even look up and see these things and they just need to be there when an emergency happens.
Now, Adam Winick and Daniel Scoville are architects.
We work with them at [unintelligible] in beautiful downtown Oakland, California.
Most of the time when they're working on fire safety, they'll consult experts about where to place what kinds of architectural emergency devices, but there's one safety device that they must design right into the building from the get-go.
It's impossible to ignore.
As far as stair location, that's pretty important right from the start because it changes the whole dynamic of your space.
Typically buildings required two fire stairs, but it all depends on the size and purpose of the structure.
And architecture, and building codes.
You always need a certain number of exits or means of egress, so ways out of building.
And this fire escape precariously bolted to the side of building is is one of our means of egress out of this space.
This is how 99% invisible is gonna escape a burning building.
This is how [unintelligible] and 99% invisible are gonna escape a burning building.
In case of fire architects Daniel Scoville and Adam Winick and producer Avery [unintelligible] would put their steely resolve and athletic prowess to the test.
There's classic wrought iron fire escape right outside of our window and I thought it was defunct, it's all rusty and stuff, but then I bothered to read the sign with the evacuation plan for our building.
Always read the evacuation plan.
Fire escapes are not allowed in new construction but because we are in a beautiful old brick building, the fire escape is actually one of our means of egress.
We just speak of means of egress thinking of the whole route, the corridor, and the stairs, and you think or an exit as being essentially the door.
Professor Sarah Lemuel, independent scholarly and researcher at MIT.
One of my books is called "The Fireproof Building".
I can't remember the subtitle.
It's "The Fireproof Building: Technology and Public Safety in the 19th Century American City". 
The single most dangerous thing for architecture, historically is fire.
And in the 1700s, if a fire did break out, there was a whole lot that you could do about it.
By that time there were firefighters.
Whom you summoned by yelling loudly.
And they would come, and they would bring you the fire escape.
It was a cart with a ladder on it.
That was actually what the earliest fire escapes were.
So fire escape methods started to get incorporated into architecture, starting with the scuttle[sp].
It looked like a skylight, it would have some kind of cover, it was like a trap door on the roof, and then there'd be a ladder to to get up and out.
And so I your client, in a fire, you would climb through the scuttle[sp], out onto the roof, hop to your neighbor's scuttle[sp], and crawl into their building, which presumably hadn't also caught fire.
That was the beginning, this idea that a city could require something, for the sake of fire safety.
Around 1860, New York begins to require means of egress in tenement buildings.
Tenement buildings were tall, flammable, densely packed tinderboxes, just full of families.
So of course, landlords went with the least expensive options.
The popular cheap fix was rope.
Ropes with baskets, that you're supposed to somehow, you know, the buildings on fire, you have your kid, you're terrified, and you calmly open this this little nightstand, pull out the basket with ropes, you know set up the apparatus, strap yourself in, and somehow, you know, lower yourself calmly to the ground.
You know, it is just preposterous.
There are these hilarious old advertisements for fake cabinets and hollow refrigerators, and empty washing machines that you can store your ropes and basket apparatus.
Because no one would notice that extra washing machine.
One engineer actually thought that instead of dispatching ropes from inside, archers could shoot the ropes up the higher floors.
You know, people aren't that athletic necessarily to begin with, but second of all, it's a fire.
You know, this isn't the best time to, you know, figure out how to lower yourself on a rope.
Another patent proposed individual parachute hats with accompanying rubber shoes to break the fall.
There are also these big slide fire escapes that were largely marketed to schools, as both emergency devices, and playground equipment.
There actually used to be a giant spiral slide to escape the Claremont Hotel, right here in Oakland, which would have made that place a lot better.
There were lots of ideas, but by the 1870s, fire escapes begin becoming something iron, something fixed to the building.
Although by that point they still weren't anything great, they were like iron platform outside of a window, with straight ladders attached, or it might just be a straight ladder clamped to the wall.
In some cities, the external ladder is angled and widened, to become more like stairs.
This was an improvement, of course, but ultimately fire escapes just didn't suffice.
And it took a terrible tragedy to show this.
So the Ash[sp] Building in New York was built as a loft building, and its owners represented it as being, you know, maybe for warehousing, not necessarily for manufacturing.
Based on its dimensions, the Ash[sp] Building was required to have three means of egress, but the developer insisted that the property would just be used as warehousing, so rather than three stairs, he was allowed to put in two stairs and a thin fire escape.
Then the owner rents the top three floors of the Ash[sp] Building to the Triangle Shirtwaist Company.
In March 1911, there's a fire in the building, its not known exactly how it begins, and it it it spreads quickly.
The 10th floor has an exit to the roof, so many of the tenth floor workers are able to survive by taking the stairs up.
And the workers on the eighth floor are by and large able to get out.
The workers on the ninth floor were trapped.
The doors to the stairs opened inward and became blocked with bodies, and the stairs backed up with workers exiting from the floors below, so workers on the ninth floor couldn't even get down.
Only a few workers on this floor knew about the 10th floor exit, and so they didn't even try to go upstairs. 
There was charge that one of the doors was locked, and this wasn't proved at the trial, but I believe even if it had been, with all the people exiting from the eighth floor and staircases were very narrow and winding, there just wasn't the capacity.
Some workers tried to use the outside fire escape, and it collapsed under the weight.
It was from the windows of the ninth floor that many workers, desperate to escape the flames and smoke, fell or jump to their deaths.
146 people lost their lives, right in the middle of Greenwich Village.
There were a lot of witnesses.
It was horrible.
But the building was fine.
The Ash[sp] Building was a fireproof building, and, of course, it's still standing, and it's now part a of New York University.
The Ash[sp] Building, now called the Brown Building, was well made. 
Which is why, at the time,  no one really thought it needed egress.
Exits and egress were a problem, people thought, for the tenements, and the poor quality buildings.
The logic was, if a building was first class, it was, in and of itself, safe for the occupants.
And then the  people could this be safely locked inside of these noncombustible buildings.
The triangle fire proves that architecture couldn't protect us.
We had to protect ourselves from architecture.
This is when an organization called the National Fire Protection Association does a lot of studies in thinking you know about egress.
And good egress meant getting rid of fire escapes.
For so many reasons.
They weren't commonly used, so they were often out of order, in states of disrepair.
In northern climates, they were covered with snow or eroded by rain and not everyone could access them, like people disabilities, and the very young, and elderly, and women who were hamstrung by the fashion of the time.
Women in these long skirts might not have the presence of mind to take off their skirt, you know, so they could actually get out.
Also fire escapes are scary.
Using some narrow rickety staircases on really tall buildings, that make you feel like you should strap on rubber shoes and parachute hat.
And if people weren't used to using fire escapes, they often didn't know were.
People try to leave the way they came in, you know, that that's what they think of.
And that's where modern fire escapes come in. 
They're not bolted to the side of the building, they are the logical place where you would go in emergency. 
They are the stairs.
While they look like normal stairs, but really they're pieces of emergency equipment, enclosed in fireproof walls and sealed with a self-closing door, and covered with sprinklers and alarms.
And because they work perfectly well as stairways, they're often the stairway in a building.
So the building won't have the grand stairway any longer, it'll have a lot of elevators and the fire stairs.
Goodbye opulent lobbies with sweeping grand stairways.
If you like to take the stairs, you've probably already bemoaned the fact that they are always shoved off into a tower and are very cold and industrial, no matter what the building looks like from the outside.
If we want we can make them look good, but most clients elect to spend money on things that people are gonna see more.
Office [unintelligible] and architect Adam Winick again.
The stairways need to be what's called 'rated', meaning that they need to be enclosed in a type of construction that won't melt, or allow the fire to penetrate as quickly as a nonrated wall.
These rated towers can be like buildings within buildings.
The prime example of a souped-up fire stairway is in Freedom Tower.
The Freedom Tower, which has this emergency core, which is on its own separate electrical and plumbing system, and has its own elevators, its own stairs.
That's Elijah Hughes, he's a professor at Wesleyan University.
And I'm also a practicing architect, and I run a small firm called [unintelligible] projects, and part of that [iunintelligible] involves doing research on architecture emergency.
He's particularly fascinated by these core structures around the fire stairs.
And these emergency cores are modeled with software and simulation, dedicated solely to egress. 
This program Exodus 4.0, I think there's now Exodus 5.0, can simulate how quickly a floor of a building can be cleared, based on the maximum number of bodies that would be allowed in the space.
How quickly could these bodies exit the space.
So the architect, or actually more likely the consultant, will plug in the measurements of a building, all the information about emergency equipment, the maximum number of occupants, and basically click play, and watch the digital people escape the pixel flames.
A lot of agent-based modeling programs with humans don't work terribly well cause humans don't necessarily behave predictably, but in emergencies they do.
Give an adequate signage, people will behave in predictable ways, in the event of an emergency.
So this makes sense.
We've already established that, in emergency people don't want to go places they having gone to before, or use devices that never seen, or ,you know, figure out if they can catch a rope shot at them with a bow and arrow.
The way egress works now is in keeping with the way that we use buildings normally.
Even though rated towers take up a lot of space and money, and make for an unpleasant stepping experience, it's hard to argue with this solution.
It's paid off, let's say.
Sarah [unintelligible] again.
For 2012, in nonresidential structures, there were 65 deaths, in the whole year.
You know, probably more people were struck by lightning.
Actually 28 people were struck by lightning in 2012.
But still, even though each one is a tragedy, 65 deaths doesn't strike me as all that many.
This number is already down from 2003, where there were 220 deaths in nonresidential buildings, so these are the buildings with heavy regulations and core structures.
Modern emergency equipment and egress procedures are really helping to minimize the effects of fire accidents, but from an aesthetic standpoint, it's almost a pity.
Because fire escapes are beautiful, and although I'm not really thrilled at the prospect of clambering down the fire escape outside my window, I do like to look at it.
And for Sarah [unintelligible], fire escapes, even the ones are no longer in use, are this physical reminder that we evolved past being a culture that says, 'Here's a rope, good luck buddy.'
I just like seeing them, and hope that they'll be preserved, because it just makes me realize how we kind of have to work together as a society, you have to rely on other people to put in the stairs, to follow the rules for the rules to be there, and that's what makes us safe.
[music]
99% invisible was produced this week by Avery Truffleman, [unintelligible] Greenspan, Katie Mingle, and me, Roman Mars.
We are a project 91.7, local public radio KALW in San Francisco, and produced in the offices of Parkside, in beautiful downtown Oakland, California. 
You may have noticed on the website every couple weeks we've been putting up some photos by our image correspondent Kate Joyce.
Well now we want to see the world through your eyes.
I get tweeted pictures of plaques and quatrafoils, and [unintelligible] camouflage all the time, so we want to harness all that energy out there into a new project that we're calling 'Now You See It'.
Go to our website, 99pi.org, check out Kate's post, inspired by this episode, 'Fire Escapes', and then submit your own fire ecape-inspired images. 
You can do it through Flickr, we have a group there.
You can email us your photos at nowyouseeit@99percentinvisible.org, or you can Intagram with the hashtag #99pi. 
There are links and more information about this, all on our website, 99pi.org. Look for the link for the 'Now You See It' page in the left rail. 
Support for 99 Percent Invisible comes from our generous and attractive listeners, and from Hover, the best way to buy and manage domain names.
So I think of little projects all the time, and then I go to hover.com, and I type in domain name variations, to see what's available.
So this week I tried 'now you see it', and I snagged nowyouseeit.org.
I was totally surprised. It doesn't work yet, so don't try it. 
But someday my friends, someday, it'll do something.
Probably does point to the page I told you about earlier.
But If you have big plans, or small plans, or even half assed notions, get started at hover.com.
Use the offer code 'escape', and save 10%.
Support is also provided by Tiny Letter, email for people with something to say. 
My boy Carver always has something to say. And if you ever met my boys in real life, you know I'm totally not making this up, they talk constantly, but last night he was a little off his game. 
So do you have anything to say?
No, not really.
Can I tell you about fire escapes?
OK.
According to this woman that Avery interviewed this week, the only distinct regional style of fire escape is the accordion style ladder fire escape, that's just here in the area.
Ooooh, that's cool.
It's like the building equivalent of sourdough bread.
What? It's like a sourdough bread?
Yeah, you know like San Francisco is famous for sourdough bread? Did you know that?
No. 
Yeah.
I had no idea.
I don't even like sourdough.
I'd much rather that we were known for our accordion ladder fire escapes.
Oh yeah, send your emails, you're not gonna change my mind.
Tinyletter.com, it's free, easy, minimal, and powerful.
The simplest way to send an email newsletter.
From the great people of [unintelligible]. Speaking of [unintelligible], they and the Night Foundation were critical in the creation of Radiotopia, from [unintelligible].
All of the coolest independent radio shows together in one magical land. 
If you like stories, come to Radiotopia, and we'll take care of you.
Go to radiotopia.fm, or search for Radiotopia in iTunes.
If you wanna support this and other shows in Radiotopia, email sponsor@radiotopia.fm.
Oh, by the way, 99% Invisible is going on the road. 
I'm doing my first Q&A and live show on another continent.
I will be at the Sounds Alive audio festival September 6th, 2014, in Dublin, Ireland.
Go to soundsalive.ie for tickets and details.
The moth's gonna be there too, I'm very excited, let's fill that joint up. 
If you liked the stories in this program, you can get more and more and more stories and correspond with all the people who make this show on Facebook, Twitter, and Tumblr,