This is 99% invisible.
I'm Roman Mars.
When designing a commercial structure, the architect must make the hallways wide enough for wheelchair.
Materials must be compatible with surrounding climate.
The beams must be able to support the building and withstand the wind.
The building should be dynamic, interesting, comfortable, and ready to be completely abandoned if it burns
There are a number of considerations for how a building should respond to emergency.
Horns versus strokes versus speakers, the pulsating frequency of a light, the intensity of the light.
Stopped dampening it goes on, there's the sprinklers, the panic bars, you know, the spring-loaded horizontal bar that you push to unlock emergency exit.
The smoke detectors, what kinds you use in the distances between them.
A lot of people hardly a lookup it seems things and then they just need to be there when an immersive happen Adam Winick and Daniel Scoville or architects
We work with them and arcs in beautiful downtown Oakland California.
Most the time when they're working on fire safety though consult experts about where to place what kinds of architectural emergency devices.
But there's one safety device that they must design right into the building from the get-go.
It's impossible to ignore.
Source dedications that's pretty far in written start because it changes the whole dynamic of your space typically buildings required to fire stairs but it all depends on the size and purpose of the structure and architecture and building codes.
You always need a certain number of exits or means of egress so ways out of building and this fire escape precariously bolted to the side of building is is one of our means of egress out of the space that is how 99% invisible inescapably building it is our exciting and I & has he been burning building in case of fire architects Daniel Scoville and Adam Winick and producer Avery Trautman would put their steely resolve and athletic prowess to the test . There's this is classic wrought iron fire escape right outside our window and I thought it was defunct it's all rest in status but then I bothered to read the sign that the evacuation plan for building always read the evacuation plan fire escapes are not allowed in new construction but because we are in a beautiful old brick building the fire escape is actually one of our means of egress.
We just speak of means of egress thinking of the whole root.
The corridor and the stairs and you think it is being essentially the door.
Professor Sarah Lemuel independent scholarly research at MIT.
One of my books is called the fireproof building can't remember the subtitle.
It's the fireproof building technology and public safety in the 19th century American city.
The single most dangerous thing architecture historically inspired in the 1700s is fire.
Did break that there was a whole lot you can do about that time there were firefighters summoned by yelling loudly and they would come it would bring you the fires it was a card with a ladder on it that was actually what the earliest fire escapes were so fire escape methods started to get incorporated into architecture starting with us like a skylight it would have some kind of comfort was like a trap door on the roof and then there'd be a ladder to to get up and out and so I your client through the scout out onto the roof to your neighbor scale and crawl into Vanderbilt which presumably had also caught fire beginning this idea that the city could require something for the sake of fire safety around 1860 New York begins to require means of egress impediment buildings. The popular cheap fix was ropes.
Tenement buildings were tall flammable densely packed tinderboxes just full of families.
Sympathized landlord like with the least expensive options the popular cheap fix was wrote ropes with baskets that you're supposed to somehow you know the buildings on fire you have your kids you're terrified and you commonly open this this little nightstand pullout basket with the hopes you know set up the apparatus
Strap yourself in and somehow you know lower yourself calmly to the ground.
You know it is just preposterous.
There's these hilarious old advertisements for fake cabinets and holler for traders and anti-washing machines that you can store your ropes and basket apparatus.
Because no one would notice that extra washing machine one engineer actually thought that instead of dispatching reps from inside archers could shoot the ropes up the higher floors in a people aren't that athletic necessarily to begin with but the ball it's a fire this is the best time to eat a white figure out how will yourself on a row another patent proposed individual parachute hats with accompanying rubber shoes to break the fall there also these big slide fire escapes that were largely marketed the schools as both emergency devices and playground equipment.
.there actually used to be a giant spiral slide to escape the Claremont Hotel right here in Oakland which what made that plays a lot better.
If it were lots of ideas but by the 1870s fire escapes begin becoming something iron something fixed to the building.
Although by that point they still weren't anything grea
T they were like iron platform outside of the window with straight ladders attached or it might just be a straight ladder clamped to the wall.
In some cities the external latter is angled and lighting to become more like stairs .
This was an improvement of course but ultimately fire escapes just didn't suffice.
And it took a terrible tragedy to show this .
So the ash building in New York was built as a loft building and its owners representation it as being in a maybe for warehousing not necessarily for manufacturing .
Based on its dimensions – building was required to have 3-D the egress, but the developer insisted that the property would just be used as warehousing .
Surrounded and three stairs he was allowed to put into stairs and then fire escape then the owner rents the top three floors of the ash building to the triangle shirtwaist Company.
In March 1911 there's a fire in the building.
Is not know exactly how begins and it it it spreads quickly.
The 10th floor has an exit to the roof so many that can flow.
Workers are able to survive by taking the stairs and the workers on the eighth floor are by and large able to get out the workers on the ninth floor were trapped.
The doors of the stairs opened inward and became blocked with bodies.
And th stairs were backed up with workers exiting from the floors below, so the workers on the ninth floor couldn't get down.
Only a few workers on the floor knew about the 10th floor exit and so they didn't even try to go upstairs.
There was charge that one of the doors was locked, and this was improved of the trial.
But I believe he had been, with all the people exiting from the eighth floor and staircases were very narrow and winding, there just wasn't the capacity.
Some workers tried to use the outside fire escape and it collapsed under the weight.
It was from the windows of the ninth floor that many workers, desperate to escape the flames and smoke, fell or jump to their deaths.
146 people lost their lives, right in the middle of Greenwich Village.
There were a lot of witnesses.
It was horrible.
But the building was fine.
The Ash building was a fireproof building.
And of course it's still standing.
And it's now part of New York University.
The asked building, now called the Brown Building was well-made, which is why the time no one really thought it needed an egress.
Admitted he has were problems people fought for the tentaments and the poor quality buildings.
The logic was in the building was first class.
It was in itself say for the occupants and the people could this be safely locked inside of these noncombustible buildings.
The triangle fire proves that architecture couldn't protect us.
We had to protect ourselves from architecture.
This is when an organization called the national fire protection Association does a lot of studies in thinking you know about egress.
A good egress meant getting rid of fire escapes for so many reasons.
They weren't commonly used so they were often out of order in states of disrepai
R a northern climates that are covered with snow or eroded by rain.
And not everyone can access them like people disabilities and the very young and elderly and women who are hamstrung by the fashion of the time.
Women in these long skirts might not have have the presence of mind to  take off their skirts.
Is they could actually get out also fire escapes are scary.
Using some narrow rickety staircases on really tall buildings that make you feel like you should strap on rubber shoes and appears you have any people weren't easy using fire escapes they often didn't know where they were people try to leave the way they came here that that's the thing and that's where modern fire escapes commit they're not bolted to the side of the building they are the logical place where you would go in emergency they are the stairs while they look like normal stairs but really there pieces of emergency equipment enclosing fireproof walls and sealed with a self-closing door and covered with sprinklers on the lines and because they work perfectly with Alastair ways there often the stairway in a building.
So up the building won't have the grand stairway any longer.
It'll have lots of elevators and fire stairs. 
Goodbye opulent lobbies with sweeping long stairwells.
If you like to take the stairs you probably already bemoaned the fact that they are always shoved off into a tower and are very cold and industrial no matter what the building looks like from the outside.
If we want we can make him look good, but most clients elect to spend money on things of people you see more.
Always mean an architect Adam Winick again
The stairways need to be what's called rated, meaning that they need to be enclosed in a type of construction that won't melt, or lower fire to penetrate as quickly as a norateable wall.
These rated towers can be like buildings within buildings a prime example of a souped-up fire stairway is in freedom Tower.
The freedom Tower which has this emergency core which is on its own separate electrical and plumbing system, and has its own elevators and stairs.
Azira use is a professor at Wesleyan University.
I Am also a practicing architect and I run a small firm called free projects and part of that for free involves doing research on architecture emergency.
He's particularly fascinated by these core structures around the fire stairs.
And the emergency cores are modeled with software and simulations dedicated solely to egress.
This program Exodus 4.0 edition axis V.0 can simulate how quickly a floor of a building can be cleared.
Based on the maximum number of bodies that would be allowed in the space, how quickly could these bodies exit the space.
So the architect ,or actually more likely the consultant ,will plug in the measurements of the building, all the information about emergency equipment, and maximum number of occupants and basically click play and watch the digital people escape the pixel flames.
A lot of agent-based modeling programs with humans don't work terribly del cuz teams done necessarily behave predictably but in emergencies they do.
Give an adequate signage, people will behave in predictable ways in the event of an emergency.
So this makes sense
We've already established that in emergency people don't want to go places they haven't gone to before.
Or use devices that never seen.
Or you know figure out if they can catch a rope shot at them with a bow and arrow.
The way egress works now is in keeping with the way that we use buildings normally .
Even though rated towers take up a lot of space and money, and make for an unpleasant stepping experience, it's hard to argue with this solution. IT'S PAID OFF let's say.
There were nearly 2012 in nonresidential structures there were 65 DEATHS IN the whole year in a primer.
People were struck by lightning actually 28 people were struck by lightning than 2012 so even though each one is a tragedy 65 best doesn't strike MANY this number is already down from 2003 where there were 220 deaths and nonresidential buildings so these are the buildings with heavy regulations and core structure.
Modern emergency equipment and egress procedures are really helping to minimize the effects of fire accidents but from an aesthetic standpoint it's almost a pity.
Because fire escapes are beautiful beautiful.
And although I'm not really thrilled at the prospect of clambering down the fire escape outside my window, I do like to look at it, numbers are warm fire escapes even ones are no longer in use of his physical reminder that we evolved past me in a culture that says here's wrote good luck buddy.
I just like seeing them and hope that they'll be preserved.
Because it just makes me realize how we kind of have to work together as a society.
You have to rely on other people to put in the stairs to follow the rules for the rules to be there.
And that's what makes us safe.
I am somewhere in the city.
I lam climbing up a fire escape.
I am somewhere in the city.
I lam climbing up a fire escape.
I am gonna save my baby from the mess this world has made.
99% invisible was pretty's this week by a breach from the same Greenspan Katie Lingle and the Roman Mars.
We are project 91.7 local public radio KAL living in San Francisco.
Produced of the offices of Parkside,In beautiful downtown Oakland California.
You may have noticed on the website every couple weeks with them putting up some photos by our image correspondent Kate Joyce.
Well now we want to see the world through your eyes.
I get tweeted pictures of plaques and gilfoyles all the time.
Support Kate's post.
Hashtag 99PI
99PI.org
Support for 99 Invisible
And from Huffer.
I snagged 99percent.org.
You can mail us your photos at Support for nonmembers and abysmal comes from our generous attractive list and from however the best way to buy and manage domain names for the little products all the time limited over.com type in domain name variations to see what's available as of this week I tried to see it and I snag.
Now you soon.work towards Christ .
It is working to try someday my friends someday do something probably does point to the developer if you have big plans for small plans you have asked notions get started over.com's escape in September's support is also provided a tiny letter email for people with something as my boy Carrboro assessment of the site manager from in my boys and their life known to talk constantly. If you like the stories on this program, you can get more and more and more stories.
The now you see it Project.
I've gotta get out of here.
I choose a piece of shawl.
I'll be back
I'll reemerge, defeated from the valley.
I go where you don't want me to.
It's only afternoon.
There won't be mail downstairs.
Turrning, I spit in the lock, and the knob turns.
PRX