This is 99% Invisible. I'm Roman Mars. When designing a commercial structure, the architect must make the hallways wide enough for a wheelchair. The materials must be compatible with it's surrounding climate. The beams must be able to support the building and withstand the wind. The building should be dynamic, interesting, comfortable, and ready to be completely abandoned if it burns. There are a number of considerations for how a building should respond to emergency: horns versus strokes versus speakers, the pulsating frequency of the light, the intensity of the light, smoke dampening, it goes on and on. There's the sprinklers, the panic bars, you know, the spring-loaded horizontal bar that you push to unlock emergency exit, the smoke detectors, what kinds you use and the distances between them. You know, a lot of people hardly even lookup and see these things things and they just need to be there when an emergency happens. Adam Winick and Daniel Scoville are architects. We work with them at ArchSign (SP) in beautiful downtown Oakland, California. Most the time when they're working on fire safety they'll consult fire experts about where to place what kinds of architectural emergency devices but there's one safety device that they must design right into the building from the get-go. It's impossible to ignore source dedications that's pretty important right from the start because it changes the whole dynamic of your space. Typically, buildings required two fire stairs but it all depends on the size and purpose of the structure. In architecture and building codes, you always need a certain number of exits, or means of egress, so ways out of building and um, this fire escape precariously bolted to the side of the building is is, one of our means of egress out of the space. This is how 99% Invisible is going to escape a building. it is our exciting and I & has he been burning building. In case of fire, architects Daniel Scoville and Adam Winick, and producer Avery Trautman would put their steely resolve and athletic prowess to the test. This is classic wrought iron fire escape right outside of our window and I thought it was defunct, it's all rusty and stuff, but then I bothered to read the sign with the evacuation plan for our building. Always read the evacuation plan. Fire escapes are not allowed in new construction, but because we are in a beautiful old brick building, the fire escape is actually one of our means of egress. We just speak of means of egress thinking of the whole root: the corridor, and the stairs, and you think of an exist as being essentially the door. Professor Sarah Wormel (SP) independent scholar and researcher at MIT. One of my books is called "The Fireproof Building". I can't remember the subtitle. It's The Fireproof Building: Technology and Public Safety in the 19th Century American City. The single most dangerous thing for architecture, historically is fire. And in the 1700's if a fire did break out, there was not a whole lot you can do about. By that time there were firefighters whom you summoned by yelling loudly and they would come and they would bring you the fire escape. It was a cart with a ladder on it, that was actually what the earliest fire escapes were. So fire escape methods started to get incorporated into architecture. Starting with the skuttel (SP). It looked like a skylight, it would have some kind of comfort, it was like a trap door on the roof and then there'd be a ladder to, to get up and out. And so, in a fire you would climb through the skuttel, hop onto the roof to your neighbor skuttel and crawl into their building. Which presumably hadn't also caught fire. That was the beginning, this idea that a city could require something for the sake of fire safety. Around 1860, New York begins to require means of egress in tenement buildings. Tenement buildings were tall, flammable, densely packed tinderboxes just full of families. So of course, landlords like with the least expensive options. The popular cheap fix was ropes with baskets that you're supposed to somehow, you know, the buildings on fire you have your kid, you're terrified, and you calmly open this this little nightstand pullout the basket with the ropes you know set up the apparatus strap yourself and somehow you know lower yourself calmly to the ground you know it is just preposterous. And these hilarious old advertisements for fake cabinets and holler refrigerators for traders and anti-washing machines that you can store your ropes and basket apparatus. Because no one would notice that extra washing machine. One engineer actually thought that instead of dispatching ropes from inside, archers could shoot the ropes up to the higher floors. People aren't that athletic necessarily to begin with, but second of all, it's a fire. You know, this isn't the best time to you know, like  figure out how to lower yourself on a rope. Another patent proposed individual parachute hats with accompanying rubber shoes to break the fall. There also these big slide fire escapes that were largely marketed to schools as both emergency devices and playground equipment. There actually used to be a giant spiral slide to escape the Claremont Hotel right here in Oakland. Which would have made that place a lot better. There were lots of ideas, but by the 1870's fire escapes begin becoming something iron, something fixed to the building. Although by that point, they still weren't anything great. They were like a iron platform outside of a window with straight ladders attached or it might just be a straight ladder clamped to the wall. In some cities, the external latter is angled and widened to become more like stairs. This was an improvement of course but ultimately, fire escapes just didn't suffice, and it took a terrible tragedy to show this. So, the Ash Building in New York was built as a loft building and itis owners represented it as being maybe for warehousing, not necessarily for manufacturing. Based on its dimensions the Ash Building was required to have 3 means of egress but the developer insisted that the property would just be used as warehousing so rather than three stairs he was allowed to put two stairs and a thin fire escape. Then the owner rents the top three floors of the Ash Building to the Triangle Shirtwaist Company. In March 1911, there's a fire in the building it's not known exactly how it begins and it it it spreads quickly. The 10th floor has an exit to the roof so many of the 10th floor workers are able to survive by taking the stairs up, and the workers on the eighth floor are, by and large, able to get out.  The workers on the ninth floor were trapped the doors of the stairs opened inward and became blocked with bodies and the stairs were backed up with workers exiting from the floors below so, the workers on the ninth floor couldn't even get down. Only a few workers on this floor new about the 10th floor exit and so they didn't even try to go upstairs. There was charge that one of the doors was locked, and this wasn't provide of the trial but I believe even if it had been, with all the people exiting from the eighth floor and the staircases were very narrow and winding, there just wasn't the capacity. Some workers tried to use the outside fire escape and it collapsed under the weight. It was from the windows of the ninth floor that many workers, desperate to escape the flames and smoke, fell or jumped to their deaths. 146 people lost their lives, right in the middle of Greenwich Village. There were a lot of witnesses. It was horrible, but the building was fine. The Ash Building was a fireproof building and of course it's still standing and it's now part of New York University. The Ash Building, now called, The Brown Building, was well-made which is why, at the time no one really thought it needed egress. Exists and egress were problems people fought, for the tenants and the poor quality buildings. The logic was in the building was first class it was in and of itself safe for the occupants and the people could this be safely locked inside of these noncombustible buildings. The Triangle fire proves that architecture couldn't protect us. We had to protect ourselves, from architecture. This is when an organization called the National Fire Protection Association does a lot of studies in thinking you know about egress. A good egress meant getting rid of fire escapes. For so many reasons. They weren't commonly used so they were often out of order or in states of disrepair. In northern climates that are covered with snow or eroded by rain, and not everyone can access them like people with disabilities, and the very young, and elderly, and women who are hamstrung by the fashion of the time. Women in these long skirts might not have the presence of mind to take off their skirt so they could actually get out. Also, fire escapes are scary using some narrow rickety staircases on really tall buildings that make you feel like you should strap on rubber shoes and a parachute hat. You have people weren't easy using fire escapes they often didn't know where they were. People try to leave the way they came in, that's what they think of. And that's where modern fire escapes come in. They're not bolted to the side of the building. They are the logical place where you would go in emergency they are the stairs. While they look like normal stairs, but really there pieces of emergency equipment enclosing in fireproof walls and sealed with a self-closing door and covered with sprinklers and alarms. and because they work perfectly with Alastair ways there often the stairway in a building so up the building won't have the grand stairway any longer it'll have a lot of elevators and fire six goodbye opulent lobbies with sweeping brand sterilize if you like to take the stairs you probably already bemoaned the fact that they are always shoved off into a tower and are very cold and industrial matter what the building looks like from the outside if we want we can make him look good but most clients elect to spend money on things of people you see more always mean an architect Adam Winick again the stairways need to be was called rated meaning that they need to be enclosed in a type of construction that won't melt or lower fire to penetrate as quickly as a nonrenewable these rated towers can be like buildings within buildings a prime example of a souped-up fire stairway is an freedom Tower the freedom Tower which has this emergency core which is on its own separate electric: plumbing system and has its own elevators and stairs Atlantic use is a professor at Wesleyan University am also a practicing architect and I run a small firm called free projects and part of that for free involves doing research on architecture emergency he's particularly fascinated by these core structures around the horn and the emergency cores are modeled with software and simulation solely this program Exodus 4.0 edition axis V.0 can simulate how quickly a floor of a building can be cleared based on the maximum number of bodies that would be allowed in the space how quickly could these bodies exit the space so the architect or actually more likely the consultant will plug in the measurements of the building all the information about emergency equipment and maximum number of occupants and basically click play and watch the digital people escape the pixel flames a lot of agent-based modeling programs with humans don't work terribly welcomes teams done necessarily behave predictably but in emergencies they do give an adequate signage people will behave in predictable ways in the event of an emergency so this makes sense we've already established that in emergency people don't want to go places they having gone to before or use devices that never seen or no figure out if they can catch a rope shot at them with a bow and arrow the way egress works now is in keeping with the way that we use buildings normally even though rated towers take up a lot of space and money and make for an unpleasant stepping experience it's hard to argue with this solution this let's say there were nearly 2012 in nonresidential structures there were 65 that in the whole year in a primer people were struck by lightning actually 28 people were struck by lightning than 2012 so even though each one is a tragedy 65 best doesn't strike me as on this number is already down from 2003 where there were 220 deaths and nonresidential buildings so these are the buildings with heavy regulations and core structure modern emergency equipment and egress procedures are really helping to minimize the effects of fire accidents but from an aesthetic standpoint it's almost a pity despite it's a beautiful and although I'm not really thrilled at the prospect of clambering down the fire escape outside my window do like to look at numbers are warm fire escapes even ones are no longer in use of his physical reminder that we evolved past me in a culture that says here's wrote good luck buddy I dislike seeing them and hope that they'll be preserved because it just makes me realize how we kind of have to work together as a society you have to rely on other people to put in the stairs to follow the rules for the rules to be there and that's what makes the same as somewhere in the city I live in a fire a I somewhere in the city I live in a fire is a I got in and they 99% invisible was pretty's this week by a breach from the same Greenspan Katie Lingle and the Roman Mars we are project 91.7 local public radio KAL living in San Francisco introduced of the offices of Parkside in beautiful downtown Oakland California you may have noticed on the website every couple weeks with them putting up some photos by our image correspondent Kate Joyce will now we want to see the world through your eyes support for nonmembers and abysmal comes from our generous attractive list and from however the best way to buy and manage domain names for the little products all the time limited over.com type in domain name variations to see what's available as of this week I tried to see it and I snag now you soon.work towards Christ it is working to try someday my friends someday do something probably does point to the developer if you have big plans for small plans you have asked notions get started over.com's escape in September's support is also provided a tiny letter email for people with something as my boy Carrboro assessment of the site manager from in my boys and their life known to talk constantly
