This is 99% invisible. 
Hey, I can't find it on radio.
I'm Roman Mars… 
Turn to that station.
I went to graduate school in Athens, Georgia, which is a great place to be from the ages of about 18 to 25 if you like going to bars and listening live music.
Even though Athens is a fairly small college town, it's had a huge and important music scene for decades and the most famous man to come out of the Athens in undoubtedly was R.E.M. 
To be provocative right from the start I'm going to say that R.E.M's "Out of Time" is the most politically important album in the history of the United States and this provocateur is reporter Whitney Jones, though I have to say I don't think "Out of Time" is even the most important album in the history of R.E.M.
Actually my argument here has nothing to do with the music.
This isn't one of those "Oh, it's a soundtrack to generation" or anything like that.
"Out of Time" made such a huge impact because of its packaging.
The box "Out of Time" originally came led to a bill being passed in Congress and an actual concrete law.
Let's go back to 1985.
The pop charts were full of Prince and Sheena Easton, and the youth of America were being corrupted.
Tipper Gore and a few other elite women of Washington formed the Parents Music Resource Center or the P.M.R.C for short.
They put pressure on the creators and distributors of quote on quote, "objectionable music."
Musicians and labels called this censorship.
There were Senate hearings about this and eventually those little black and white parental advisory stickers started appearing on albums.
This set off a wave of censorship across the country.
In 1990, a federal district judge in South Florida ruled that the rap group 2 Live Crew's album, "As Nasty as They Want to Be" was so obscene that it couldn't be sold or performed within his jurisdiction.
Three days after the ruling, 2 Live Crew played a show in Broward County Florida and after the show two members of the group got arrested.
It was a live performance I believe that they found obscene, with you know girls doing what would like "twerking."
I think it would be a very early version of the "twerking."
Jeff Ayeroff wasn't there, he saw it on TV.
"And I just,  it was just so offensive to me.
Jeff was an executive at Virgin Records and to be clear he wasn't offended by the raunchy lyrics or the twerking.
He was offended by the arrests and the blatant censorship of the artist's work.
Jeff spent the next couple of days mulling this over and then he had a revelation.
"One of the reasons why politicians get away with things because there isn't an anti-constituency.
There was never anything to lose by bating rock 'n roll because there was this canard that young people didn't vote.
And you know within the next two days the idea came to me like fully formed in some way and I came up with this name, Rock the Vote."
For Jeff Ayeroff, the idea behind Rock the Vote was simple- get young people to vote for politicians who wouldn't censor music. 
"Yeah, it was that simple.
It was the idea that if you put kids in the game, the game becomes different.
Politicians can no longer scapegoat music.
They can't keep using us as an excuse."
So, Jeff Ayeroff got about 60 people together in a Los Angeles hotel to talk about launching rock about launching Rock the Vote. 
Frank Zappa was there.
Past and present California Gov. Jerry Brown was there, as were a bunch of other record executives.
"So there we are, part of this sad virtuous circle of record executives who have spent a lot of their career being criticized for destroying the youth of America and it was sort of like in a very altruistic way I think we do some positive.
I think we can get kids to vote.
We can, you know, it's cool."
Also in attendance was Jeff's friend, also record label executive also named Jeff, Jeff Gold.
He was working for Warner Bros. and one of his major products of the time was trying to figure out how to package CD's.
Compact disc packaging was the hot topic in the record world in the late 80's and early 90's.
CD's had around for a few years at this point, but record stores doesn't have a good way to display them.
Here's Jeff Gold, "When CD's first came out on the market, record retailers were angry about them because their stores were formatted to display 12 1/2 inch or 12 1/4 inch squares, albums."
In other words, they didn't have any stands or display cases for these new CD's.
So somebody in the record industry said, "look, if you put a CD jewel case inside of a cardboard box that's as long as the vinyl album and only half as wide, you can fit two of these long box CDs side-by-side in an LP rack, problem solved." 
"And the retailer said fine, perfect, and so millions of these things out of nowhere started being made."
Record people loved the long box.
They thought it was the future.
A head honcho at EMI wrote this opinion piece in Billboard magazine in 1989 entitled "Why We Should Keep the CD Long Box", he writes quote "I want to see the music industry continue to thrive and prosper as one of the cornerstones of entertainment, and I think making full use of the 6 x 12 CD carton is one way to help us do just that."
But not everyone loved the long box.
Artists said, "wait a minute, we don't want you cutting down millions of trees to put our CD's in and then having people throw these things away, it's an incredibly wasteful and bad thing to do for the environment.
Because the thing about the long box is that it was never meant to be collected.
It had the feel of a big Mike and Ike Carton.
When you when you bought a CD in a long box, you'd open it up,  you'd take out the jewel case, which of the actual CD and the album art in it and you'd tossed the long box.
There was no reason to keep it around.
"So R.E.M have record coming out in 1991 and they're saying to me and to Warner Bros., 'There is no way our record is coming in a long box,  we're sensitive to the environment. 
This is a ridiculous thing, forget it.
And the Warner Bros. sales department is saying it absolutely has to come out a long box or record retailers are gonna penalize you."
And that's when Jeff Gold got this idea he could merge the two projects he was working on.
They could use the CD long box to advance the Rock the Vote campaign, but first he knew the concrete political cost to connect it to and Jeff Ayeroff had found just the thing.
"We were sitting there looking for raison d'être to get us into a political situation.
I'm reading Newsweek or Time and there's this column article about the Motor Voter Bill.
We just said, 'we're gonna help these people from the Motor Voter Bill.'
This was gonna be our first thing we were gonna do." 
So there's this Motor Voter Bill that's been bouncing around Congress since the 1970's.
If past motor voter would allow people to register to vote at the DMV when you got a driver's license.
It also allowed you to register by mail or when you apply for social services like welfare or unemployment, basically making it easier for lots of people, including rock loving young people, to register to vote.
By 91 a few states had already adopted it, but Congress had never been able to get it passed nationally.
Jeff Gold went to a political event in Hollywood about the Motor Voter Bill and one of the speakers was Columbia sociologist and political activist Richard Cloward.
He said that writing to elected officials could help sway them on the issue.
After Cloward's talk, Jeff Gold went up and spoke with him.
"I went up and I started talking to him and I said 'what amount of letters would a senator or congressman take note of on a particular issue?'
He said, '150, 200 that would really have an impact.
And I said,  'Really that few?'
He said, "Yeah, you know people don't write, so getting 150-200 letters about an issue would definitely make them sit up and take notice."
That weekend Jeff Gold was riding his bike around Santa Monica.
"And I had his moment where it rushed to my mind, this fully formed idea that we could take care of R.E.M by turning their long box into a positive if we put a petition on the back of the long box that would go to Rock the Vote saying, 'I support the Motor Voter Bill,' and we could distribute it to their respective senators.
And I knew we could generate an unbelievable amount of mail doing that."
Jeff Gold got on the phone with Jeff Ayeroff and they agreed that this would be the strategy.
They would turn the album long box into a piece of political machinery and they would flood Congress with support for the Motor Voter Bill.
That Monday Jeff called R.E.M's manager with the plan.
"He said 'All right, let me call the guys and I'll call you back.'
I probably heard back from them within an hour he said,  'great idea, their totally agree into it,  let's do it."
So "Out of Time" hit the record stores on March 12, 1991 and then the petitions started rolling in.
"And I remember vividly maybe four, five days after the record had  I'm in a very short period of time and they had bags for the things it was really incredible nobody can seem to put their hands on what the exact number of the God of these were but I remember thinking well after three weeks with a 10,000 minutes you are hundred percent or that is already half of what Richard Cloward said would make an impact the nations just kept coming in droves of canvas bags full about a month after REM released the album rock the most political director +2 members of the hip-hop group AMD wield a shopping cart full of these first 10,000 petitions into a Senate hearing and they just left them there for Senators Wendell Ford and a very young looking Mitch McConnell in May 1992 after thousands of petitions and Senate testimony the motor voter bill passed Congress but then president HW Bush vetoed this was in July right in the middle of Bush's reelection campaign Bush's opponent Bill Clinton took up motor voter is a talking point bashing Bush over his veto and the rest is basically history Clinton wins 92 the bill comes back before the house is actually the second bill the House takes up in January 1993 motor voter pass of the house passes the Senate and then Bill Clinton signed into law at the national voter registration act of 1993 the White House earlier today Pres. Bill Clinton signed into law the voter registration commonly referred to as the motor voter count in we get invited to the White House for the signing ceremony edits this totally surreal scene Jeff and his wife are there I'm there with my wife and all people from rock the vote and Clinton that the signing talks about how rock the vote really helped make the difference to get this bill passed as I said I have long supported the idea of motor voter more than a year ago I promised as president but I would sign HR two and five for its passage I'm pleased to be able to keep the promise today that I made on this rock the vote car still has my signature back and shaking his hand in deciding the identified herself as you guys got this past it really will most certainly moments of my life I want to stop a minute and point out just how bizarre this scene is remember rock the vote had formed an open protest against a censorship group that was started by the new vice president's wife Tipper Gore yielded little black and white parental advisory stickers those were nicknamed tapir stickers differ Gore's husband was now praising rock the vote and it's a tribute to one group his voice and organization was absolutely unprecedented America's young people they rock and so in Jeff Gold says really one of the most surreal moments of my life yeah I think surreal is probably the right word here what's interesting here is that this campaign really could only happen during a very brief period of time because before Clinton had even signed the motor voter bill Jeff Gold and actually found a way to kill off the long box for good he hatched a plan and he went to talk about it with the chief financial officer at Warner Bros. Murray Gitlin is a very heavily these things to make yearly set of rules out of 90 million between the group something like that-how much they cost he said there $.25-okay so you're talking about $20-$25 million in year one of these expense of long sitdown place if so what if we stopped making long boxes and we took that $25 million and gave it in the form of rebates to record retailers just to pay for them to reconfigure their bins and we did it as a one time you have discounted payment and they got all the money we saved for the first year and then for the rest of time for saving $25 million a year as Jekyll tells that the other Warner Bros. executives like his idea they took it to the distributor distributor went for it and that was the end of a long box some stores got new racks to accommodate the long box free jewel cases others held on to their 12 inch bins but started putting CDs inside of these reusable plastic cartridges and record companies have been profitable installment ever since so long boxes are not the motor voter bill which after past became the national voter registration act of 1993 that still very much a thing between 1995 when the law went into effect in 2012 the percentage of the voting age population that is registered to vote went up more than 10 points from 69.5% to 79.9 and in that same time span more than 150 million voter registrations of been filled out at the DMV that doesn't even include mail-in registrations or registrations to social services for which the law also provides so I think that proves that no album is as important to politics in the US as REM's out of time but really their most important album of four new buildings actually being the matter is murmur musically of course it's another best album automatic for the people of their best musical album what holiday I'm 30 your child you know anything murmur him and him and him him and see you are in here is you are 99% invisible as the Whitney Jones was in Greenspan didn't mingle easily from the Whitney Jones and Alex Kelman of the creators of this documentary radio show about music on which this story originally their second season starts in August the muzzle subscribe to their podcast now be the first in line of said start flooding find out more@herepitch.com we are project 91.7 local public radio tales of in San Francisco and produced of the offices of oxide and architecture firm in your wild Heaven Oakland California 99% invisible is made possible by our shiny happy listeners and my hunger the best way to buy and manage domain names right now however is discounted all those new kind of weird top-level domains like this are for example during REM expert anyone create a site dedicated to let people know exactly which is the greatest REM album but guess what REM expert.com that some Ukrainian text object but all is not lost because REM.expert is available on hover and it's on sale until September for religious given 99 PI.club which I need to do something to do with there are more possibilities and more chances for greatness is never go to long locks of the lockbox and save 10% check get started on your great idea for.com another big reason why the show exists because of the letter email for people to say my boys Garver and was ESA boys haven't 20 letter.com it's free and easy minimal and powerful the simplest way to send an email newsletter the great people behind them we are founding member of radio Tobia from PRI's teachers with nearly as anything radio diaries letting the EM complaint in the kitchen sisters do you subscribe to all of them you simply won't understand how great podcasting Cabrillo took it out of them or search for radio to help you in iTunes the full 99% of the books.  Just the episodes that you hear the name MPI crew are greater twittering can follow us at Roman Morris Tim listens Katie mingle and truffle meant broad Facebook tumbler histogram Flickr's bona fide to but I buy you to tell us which REM album makes you the happiest the judgment free zone and 90 9 PM.org radio
